---
title: "Concepts, Techniques, and Models of Computer Programming"
date: 2025-05-28T00:00:00+01:00
draft: false
---

https://www.amazon.com/Concepts-Techniques-Models-Computer-Programing/dp/8120326857?crid=3P902OAGGACKK&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.bG9QmHxGp8WiiJP1PhSeG-B5mgjBu8geVlB92DX989gx2_gNtG4hHZ2SBNkfX1O3593fAAFA-aDZsOtkyZUlDmXN03mEvRzDFIi7BpODUD-R-OCkzwxzYRpH0yjVfxVpnZNGqec1t1hoBFPaZ_Kgp99ztsRTVJiAUN7TCbcC8wOe3p-_IQivRldsmRdMcWTUR-FVCZH56WZqvwcY6xoDkdA2LS79wZTbmDGrunHpgpk.iCLnsC-17jAi1Jy_uVTwnOL5a1FVoWCMFTKtam2WAiY&dib_tag=se&keywords=concepts+techniques+and+models+of+computer+programming&qid=1748435391&sprefix=concepts+techni%2Caps%2C201&sr=8-1[Concepts,
Techniques, and Models of Computer Programming], otherwise called CTM, by Peter
van Roy and Seif Haridi is my "one book" for software development, if you need
to pick one.

What I love about CTM is that it covers a huge range in topics, from programming
in the small to in the large, functional programming to object oriented
programming, and sequential programming to concurrent programming.  Not only
does it cover all these topics but, in my opinion, covers each of them
sufficiently such that the reader can understand them and successfully use them
correctly.

I don't remember exactly when I discovered CTM but probably three to five years
after it was published (which was in 2004).  It's 900 pages.  Definitely a text
book.  I have a memory of somewhere between 2007 and 2009 reading about how
ports (channel for messages) were implemented.  I struggled but after I
understood it I was both very proud and felt I'd learned something new, and
different, and something that I hadn't seen in mainstream languages before and
still haven't.

Where I remember CTM, and Mozart/Oz, really shining is in distributed systems.
Distributed systems are especially difficult when it comes to failures and CTM
made failures tractable.  Its usage of failure streams, in particular, is a
concept I have not seen anywhere, despite it being very powerful and useful.
Mozart/Oz isn't stuck in the traditional RPC world that seems so good at first
but breaks down in the face of latency and failures.  It provides a model that
lets you get a transparent-feeling RPC interface but also gracefully handles
errors.  Its approach to distributed programming goes far beyond that, all while
staying correct and simple (or as simple as possible).

While I think CTM is a profound piece of work, it does not cover all elements of
software development that I think are important.  I am very much a proponent of
statically typed languages, such as Ocaml.  Mozart/Oz is a dynamically typed
language.  But that's OK, there is only so much room.  I think that types are a
valuable part of software engineering but the concepts CTM covers are
independent of types and a side journey into types would likely obfuscate the
discussion.  The value of CTM is not necessarily using every concept in the
book, but being aware of them, understanding them, and using them to inform your
own software development.

My goal is to read, on average, two chapters per week and write a short post
based on those chapters.  I am not a skilled enough writer, and I do not
understand the concepts of CTM well enough, for any of these blog posts to be a
replacement for actually reading CTM, nor is that the goal, but I think this
book is simply so great that it's worth reading and thinking about deeply enough
to write about.

Up next: Chapters 1 & 2.
